---
layout: post
title:  "Teaching Rust at University of Maryland"
date:   2018-08-25
excerpt: "My reflections on the process of creating a Rust curriculum at UMD"
image: "/images/rust.png"
---
At University of Maryland: College Park, I was a teaching assistant for a mid-level programming course called "Organization of Programming Languages".  Up until this
course, students are only exposed to Java and C, which share a lot of syntax and semantics.  The point of this course is to introduce students to entirely different
programming languages, and to give students more tools in their programming toolbelt.  For a long time, we did this by teaching three languages that are vastly different
from each other and from what they have previously learned.  We taught them Ruby as their first scripting language, OCaml as their first functional language, and Prolog
as their first Logical language.  

The scripting and functional language paradigms are good tools for programmers to know, as many real software projects take advantage of them.  Logic programming, though
interesting and unique, is not very practical.  There are tons of new, interesting, and, most importantly, practical languages out there these days, so we decided to
replace Prolog in our curriculum.  We chose to replace it with Rust!

## Why Rust
Like I said, there are *plenty* of interesting and practical languages out there, of which Rust is only one.  Some of the languages we were deciding between include:
* Rust
* Go
* Javascript
* Haskell

So why Rust? Well Haskell is quite similar to OCaml, so not much new would be gained from teaching it.  There is already another elective that teaches full stack web
development with nodeJS, so JS is already covered.  That leaves Go and Rust.  Either would have been a good pick, as both fit the criteria of being interesting and
practical.  Ultimately, there were three main reasons Rust beat Go:
* It has many similarities to OCaml, so the semantics can be related back to a language that is fresh in the student's minds
* Students have learned C, so they know the pain of manual memory management, but they do not know any solution to this pain besides garbage collection
* The professor teaching the class worked on [the Cyclone Language](https://cyclone.thelanguage.org/), which pioneered many of the safety features that Rust boasts

So Rust replaced Prolog! Since I was the only TA who knew Rust when we decided to teach it, I took on much of the responsibility for making curriculum material.

## How we taught Rust
In order to teach Rust we had to create lecture slides to show the students during class.  Luckily, there is a [free
book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/2018-edition/index.html) that teaches everything a beginner could ever want to know about Rust.  All we had to do was convert the
relevant sections of the book into a form that made sense in a slide deck.  I say "all we had to do", but this was actually a fairly laborious process.  We could not get 
every topic from the book in, as we had a fairly limited amount of time to teach this (about 3 weeks).  Despite this, we made sure to fit the stuff that makes Rust
interesting: 
* Ownership
* Memory Management
* Mutability
* Lifetimes
* Traits
* Structs and Enums
* Closures and Iterators
* Smart Pointers

In addition to slides, we also needed a sizeable programming assignment in Rust so students could get actually work with the language.  This project was modeled after
the introductory OCaml and Prolog projects.  It started with a few standalone toy functions that help students begin to dig into the language without being too
intimidating.  Examples of such functions are calculating the mean of a slice of floats and performing a binary search on a sorted slice.  

Most new Rust programmers have experienced "fighting the borrow checker". In this fight, the programmer writes code that would be "fine" in something like C, but the Rust
compiler does not deem it to be safe, and so does not compile.  As the programmer learns the rules, they fight the borrow checker less and less often.  It is an important
part of learning the language.  The second part of the project attempted to force students into the fight by presenting them with prewritten code that does pass the
borrow checker and ask them to correct it.  Most of the examples involve illegally returning references or attempting to use a value after being moved.

The third part was intended to illustrate one of the advantages of traits over traditional Java-style interfaces.  It involved defining a trait for a FIFO queue and then
implementing it for the `Vec<T>` type. This is fairly straightforward but it is meant to illustrate that defining functionality for a type in Rust is not something that
only the author of that type is restricted to!  

The final part was to implement a generic binary search tree.  This gives experience using the heap-allocation smart pointer, `Box<T>`, as well as using built in operators
such as <, >, and == on generic types that are bounded by operator traits.

Rust would only be tested on the final exam.  There would be no quizz or midterm exam with Rust material.  Since the time spent on Rust was so small, the Rust section of the exam was worth less than 15% of the overall
score.

## What Didn't Work
Since this was a new curriculum, there are certainly some areas that could be improved.  As you may have noticed, the parts of the programming assignment were very
disjointed, and maybe a bit too easy.  Each part was an isolated mini-project meant to illustrate one part of the language.  It was done this way mostly because that is how the
Prolog project was written.  The project was good, considering only I worked on it for only two weeks prior to launch.  However, given time and manpower, I have seen the
TAs of this course come up with some very in depth and engaging projects.  I hope that this project will get that same treatment in the future.

Additionally, some of the final exam questions were too esoteric and the rubric had to be relaxed, while others were way too easy and nearly eveyone answered correctly.
As with the project, these questions were a good start, but need some improvement.  A big issue was that some of them contained code snippets and asked for the line
number in which something happened, like a value is dropped.  Many students picked a nearby line but not the "correct" line.  The question was just too ambiguous for
students to answer correctly.  I think the idea of the questions were good, but their answers could be improved so that so much precision is not needed to answer the
questions.

Also, Rust is still a young language that is under (very) active deveolpment! Many of the pain points that students had about learning the language are being actively
worked on or fixed!  One such example is [match ergonomics](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2018/05/10/Rust-1.26.html#nicer-match-bindings).  Before this patch, matching on
a reference required a very non-obvious and unergonomic idiom.  Many students struggled with this in their projects, and then was fixed a few days after the project
concluded.  Another pain point was the ability to nest method calls.  An example is: `vec.push(vec.pop())`.  This code is correct, but the borrow checker believes that
there are two borrows of `vec` going on at the same time, one for `push` and one for `pop`.  We know that these calls are in sequence and not at the same time, so no
borrow error should happen, but it does.  This is actively being worked on with Non-Lexical Lifetimes.  I think that the fact that pain points can dissapear overnight
would be a good thing to make a point about during lecture in a future semester.

Lastly, we left out a lot of stuff that is pretty important, but just didn't make the cut.  We did not talk at all about topics like threads, modules, and crates.  The
biggest (in my opinion) topic that was left out was error handling with `Result<T,E>`.  I think this is a great error handling type with many neat methods to help handle
the errors, but we simply did not have the time.  I think in the future we could fit it when we teach iterators and closures.  Some of the best features of `Result<T,E>`
come from its methods that accept closures, so this might be a good time to discuss it in a bit more detail.

## What Worked
The lectures seemed to do a good job at teaching the concepts of Rust to students.  Most students I spoke with at office hours seemed to grasp owenership, references, and even lifetimes without too much
trouble.

I don't have a lot to say about what worked, but that is because the most important part of this project, teaching a large group the core concepts of Rust, went so well.
All of the problems I described above concern auxillary parts of the curriculum, and they can be improved over time.  Because of this, I think that the new curriculum was
a big success!

At the very least, this was a course with nearly 400 students in it.  There is a very good chance that at least a few of those students found Rust genuinely interesting,
and will go on to explore more of it themselves.  As a Rust evangalist, this thought makes me very happy :)


